# Breast Cancer Wisconsin Dataset : 
## Application and Results of 6 Different Machine Learning Classification Algorithms
According to BreastCancer.org, breast cancer is the most common cancer across the globe, accounting for roughly 12.5% of all new cancer cases worldwide. This is reflected within the United States, where an estimated 30% of newly diagnosed cancers in women will be breast cancer. It is no secret how lethal this cancer can be, and how critical it is to be able to detect it early in order to begin treatment and save patients' lives. Of course, genetics plays a role, which is why when one woman in a family is diagnosed with breast cancer, doctors will urge others that are closely related to her to get tested as well. However, the majority of breast cancer cases occur in women with no prior family history of breast cancer - about 85% specifically. With such a high incidence of mutations resulting from aging and other life processes, it becomes evident that relying solely on the diagnoses of other women in the family is not a perfect strategy. We must become better at detecting harmful breast cancer cells before they spread into the rest of the body.

For this study, we intend to apply six different classification algorithms to a dataset created by the University of Wisconsin, whose researchers took grayscale images of 569 different breast cancer cell's nuclei. This dataset consists of several features of each nucleus, and whether the cell is diagnosed malignant (M) or benign (B). Of these 569 samples, 357 were diagnosed benign, and 212 malignant. For each of these 10 features, the mean, standard error, and "worst" (mean of the three largest values) is calculated, totaling to 32 columns including the sample's unique ID and diagnosis. 

The six algorithms that will be applied to this dataset include: Decision Tree, Random Forest, k-Neural Network (kNN), Logistic Regression, Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Naive Bayes Classifier. These algorithms have been applied in previous studies, including those that used medical data, and the results have been promising. In particular, it appears the SVM and Random Forest perform the best, with kNN performing the worst, but none have testing accuracies below 90\%. Thus, there is high confidence that these algorithms will all perform very well with this dataset, further proving the viability of using machine learning to diagnose breast cancer.

## Findings

Six machine learning algorithms - Decision Tree, Random Forest, Logistic Regression, k-Nearest Neighbors, Support Vector Machine, and Naive Bayes - were applied on the Wisconsin Breast Cancer Dataset. The algorithm that performed the best was Support Vector Machine at 98% accuracy and the algorithm that performed the worst was Naive Bayes at 90%. Decision Tree performed the second best at 96% before fine-tuning and 97% accuracy after fine-tuning. However, it should noted that all algorithms performed at or above 90% before and after fine-tuning techniques. The fine-tuning techniques were GridSearchCV to find optimal values for parameters for Decision Tree, Support Vector Machine, and Naive Bayes, feature selection for Random Forest, regularization to minimize overfitting for Logistic Regression, and changing the k-value for k-Nearest Neighbors. After fine-tuning the algorithms, the accuracy and precisions for all 6 algorithms either stayed the same or improved from their original values. For example, Random Forest improved from an accuracy of 91% to 95% after fine-tuning and its precision for predicting benign cancer samples improved from 77% to 84%. The results after fine-tuning showed many algorithms predicting malignant cancer at 100%  such as Decision Tree, Random Forest, and Support Machine Vector (See Tables VI and VII). 

According to our related works, a study in 2021 Machine Learning Algorithms For Breast Cancer Prediction and Diagnosis, who performed 5 out of 6 algorithms (Naive Bayes was excluded) on the Wisconsin Breast Cancer Dataset, found that Support Vector Machine outperformed the other algorithms at an accuracy of 97%. Another study, Diagnosis of Breast Cancer Using Random Forests, reported that Random Forest did the best, but noted that Support Vector Machine did the second best. Our study showed Support Vector Machine performing at an accuracy of 98%. The reason Support Vector Machine perform so exceedingly well on this classification problem is due to how SVM creates hyperplanes for the boundaries of 2 clusters before finding an optimal hyperplane that is the maximum distance between the two. Our study showed that Naive Bayes performed the worst out of the algorithms at 90%, but our related work studies above did not apply Naive Bayes. In all, Support Vector Machine was supported by other works in performing exceedingly well on the Wisconsin Breast Cancer Dataset. 
